  ALSO BY HARUKI MURAKAMI FICTION  After Dark  After the Quake  Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman  Dance Dance Dance  The Elephant Vanishes  Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World Kafka on the Shore  Norwegian Wood  South of the Border, West of the Sun Sputnik Sweetheart  A Wild Sheep Chase  The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle  NONFICTION  Underground: The Tokyo Gas Attack and the Japanese Psychewas busy but if I’d come in the morning while he jogged in Central Park we could talk while we ran together. We talked about all kinds of things as we jogged around the park early one morning. Naturally I didn’t tape our conversation and couldn’t take any notes, so all that I recall now is the happy memory of the two of us jogging together in the brisk morning air.  In the 1980s I used to jog every morning in Tokyo and often passed a very attractive young woman. We passed each other jogging for several years and got to recognize each other by sight and smile a greeting each time we passed. I never spoke to her (I’m too shy), and of course don’t even know her name. But seeing her face every morning as I ran was one of life’s small pleasures. Without pleasures like that, it’s pretty hard to get up and go jogging every morning.  One other memory I hold dear is running high up in Boulder, Colorado, with Yuko Arimori, the Japanese silver medalist in the marathon at the Barcelona Olympics. This was just some light jogging, but still, coming from Japan and running all of a sudden at a height of ten thousand feet was very tough—my lungs screamed, and I felt dizzy and terribly thirsty. Miss Arimori gave me a cool look and just said, “Is something the matter, Mr. Murakami?” I learned how rigorous the world of professional runners is (though I should add that she’s a very kind person). By the third day, though, my body had gotten used to the thin atmosphere, and I could enjoy the crisp air of the Rockies.

  I’ve met many people through running, which has been one of its real pleasures. And many people have helped me, and encouraged me. At this point what I should do—like in an Academy Awards acceptance speech—is express my thanks to many people, but there are too many to thank, and the names would probably mean nothing to most readers. I’ll confine myself to the following.  The title of this book is taken from the title of a short-story collection by a writer beloved to me, Raymond Carver, What We Talk About When We Talk About Love. I’m thankful to his widow, Tess Gallagher, who was kind enough to give me permission to use the title in this way. I am also deeply thankful to the editor of this book, Midori Oka, who has patiently waited for ten years.  Finally, I dedicate this book to all the runners I’ve encountered on the road—those I’ve passed, and those who’ve passed me. Without all of you, I never would have kept on running.  HARUKI MURAKAMI AUGUST 2007

  ALSO BY HARUKI MURAKAMI FICTION  After Dark  After the Quake  Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman  Dance Dance Dance  The Elephant Vanishes  Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World Kafka on the Shore  Norwegian Wood  South of the Border, West of the Sun Sputnik Sweetheart  A Wild Sheep Chase  The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle  NONFICTION  Underground: The Tokyo Gas Attack and the Japanese Psyche